C# 7.x: in parameter mode (#219)
dotnet/csharpstandard: standard/expressions.md

  - otherwise, the parameter’s passing mode is input, in which case, an unnamed *variable_reference* is created with the same type as that of the corresponding parameter. The argument expression is evaluated and an implicit conversion ([§10.2](conversions.md#102-implicit-conversions)) to the corresponding parameter type is performed. The resulting value becomes the initial value of the unnamed *variable_reference* whose storage location becomes the storage location represented by the input parameter in the function member invocation.

     > *Example*: Given the following declarations and method calls:
     >
     > ```csharp
     > public static void M1(in int p1) { … }
     > int i = 10;
     > M1(i);         // transformed to a temporary input argument
     > M1(i + 5);     // transformed to a temporary input argument
     > ```
     >
     > In each method call, an unnamed `int` is created, initialized with the argument’s value, and then passed as an input argument. See [§11.6.4.2](expressions.md#11642-applicable-function-member) and §better-argument-passing-mode-new-clause.
     >
     > *end example*

> - For an input, output, or reference parameter, the variable reference is evaluated and the resulting storage location becomes the storage location represented by the parameter in the function member invocation. If the variable reference given as an input, output, or reference is an array element of a *reference_type*, a run-time check is performed to ensure that the element type of the array is identical to the type of the parameter. If this check fails, a `System.ArrayTypeMismatchException` is thrown.

Reviewer: This could also be simpler by using "pass by reference" terminology.

  -  otherwise, the parameter’s passing mode is input, in which case, an unnamed *variable_reference* is created with the same type as that of the corresponding parameter. The argument expression is evaluated and an implicit conversion ([§11.2](conversions.md#112-implicit-conversions)) to the corresponding parameter type is performed. The resulting value becomes the initial value of the unnamed *variable_reference* whose storage location becomes the storage location represented by the input parameter in the function member invocation.  
     > *Example*: Given the following declarations and method calls:
     > ```csharp
     > public static void M1(in int p1) { … }
     > int i = 10;
     > M1(i);         // transformed to a temporary input argument
     > M1(i + 5);     // transformed to a temporary input argument
     > ```
     > In each method call, an unnamed `int` is created, initialized with the argument’s value, and then passed as an input argument. See [§12.6.4.2](expressions.md#12642-applicable-function-member) and §better-argument-passing-mode-new-clause. *end example*  

> -   For an input, output, or reference parameter, the variable reference is evaluated and the resulting storage location becomes the storage location represented by the parameter in the function member invocation. If the variable reference given as an input, output, or reference is an array element of a *reference_type*, a run-time check is performed to ensure that the element type of the array is identical to the type of the parameter. If this check fails, a `System.ArrayTypeMismatchException` is thrown.

Reviewer 2: The run-time check should not be performed for an input parameter. See <https://github.com/dotnet/csharpstandard/issues/264#issuecomment-874738023>.

Reviewer: Updated

During the run-time processing of a function member invocation ([§12.6.6](expressions.md#1266-function-member-invocation)), the expressions or variable references of an argument list are evaluated in order, from left to right, as follows:

- For a value parameter, if the parameter’s passing mode is value
  - the argument expression is evaluated and an implicit conversion ([§10.2](conversions.md#102-implicit-conversions)) to the corresponding parameter type is performed. The resulting value becomes the initial value of the value parameter in the function member invocation.

>   - otherwise, the parameter’s passing mode is input, in which case, an unnamed *variable_reference* is created with the same type as that of the corresponding parameter. The argument expression is evaluated and an implicit conversion ([§10.2](conversions.md#102-implicit-conversions)) to the corresponding parameter type is performed. The resulting value becomes the initial value of the unnamed *variable_reference* whose storage location becomes the storage location represented by the input parameter in the function member invocation.

Reviewer 3: We might want an example where this is distinctly odd, because an argument "passed by value" really isn't...

```csharp
class Program
{
    static void Main()
    {
        int x = 0;
        M(x, ref x);
    }

    static void M(in int a, ref int b)
    {
        Console.WriteLine(a); // Prints 0
        b = 5;
        Console.WriteLine(a); // Prints 5
    }
}
```

Reviewer 3: I'm not suggesting we do that in this PR though.

Reviewer 3: Note that calling `M(x + 0, ref x)` prints 0 twice. I wonder how many tools would propose removing the "+ 0" as pointless...

Reviewer 4: The language here is wrong, we don't "create" (instances of) grammar productions. The semantics is that a temporary variable/storage location is created and it is that which is assigned to and then passed. Meeting in 10min so no wordsmithing at this time!

Reviewer 4: @jskeet  – "nice" example of aliasing, that should certainly go in at least a Note and maybe as an Example

Reviewer 3: Action from 2023-04-19: @BillWagner to log the need for a note about odd aliasing later, and assign to @jskeet.

See #782

>   - otherwise, the parameter’s passing mode is input, in which case, an unnamed *variable_reference* is created with the same type as that of the corresponding parameter. The argument expression is evaluated and an implicit conversion ([§10.2](conversions.md#102-implicit-conversions)) to the corresponding parameter type is performed. The resulting value becomes the initial value of the unnamed *variable_reference* whose storage location becomes the storage location represented by the input parameter in the function member invocation.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  - otherwise, the parameter’s passing mode is input, in which case, an unnamed *variable_reference* is created with the same type as that of the corresponding parameter. The argument expression is evaluated and an implicit conversion ([§10.2](conversions.md#102-implicit-conversions)) to the corresponding parameter type is performed. The resulting value becomes the initial value of the unnamed *variable_reference*. That storage location is represented by the input parameter in the function member invocation.
```

>   - otherwise, the parameter’s passing mode is input, in which case, an unnamed *variable_reference* is created with the same type as that of the corresponding parameter. The argument expression is evaluated and an implicit conversion ([§10.2](conversions.md#102-implicit-conversions)) to the corresponding parameter type is performed. The resulting value becomes the initial value of the unnamed *variable_reference* whose storage location becomes the storage location represented by the input parameter in the function member invocation.

Reviewer 3: Addressing Nigel's comment of "The language here is wrong, we don't "create" (instances of) grammar productions.":

```suggestion
  - otherwise, the parameter’s passing mode is input, in which case, a storage location is created with the same type as that of the corresponding parameter. The argument expression is evaluated and an implicit conversion ([§10.2](conversions.md#102-implicit-conversions)) to the corresponding parameter type is performed. The resulting value is stored within that storage location. That storage location is represented by the input parameter in the function member invocation.
```

Action from 2023-04-19: Accept this suggestion, we think...

     > *Example*: Given the following declarations and method calls:
     >
     > ```csharp
     > public static void M1(in int p1) { … }
     > int i = 10;
     > M1(i);         // transformed to a temporary input argument
     > M1(i + 5);     // transformed to a temporary input argument
     > ```
     >

>      > In each method call, an unnamed `int` is created, initialized with the argument’s value, and then passed as an input argument. See [§12.6.4.2](expressions.md#12642-applicable-function-member) and §better-argument-passing-mode-new-clause.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     > In each method call, an unnamed `int` variable is created, initialized with the argument’s value, and then passed as an input argument. See [§12.6.4.2](expressions.md#12642-applicable-function-member) and §better-argument-passing-mode-new-clause.
```

>
> *end example*

> The array co-variance rules ([§16.6](arrays.md#166-array-covariance)) permit a value of an array type `A[]` to be a reference to an instance of an array type `B[]`, provided an implicit reference conversion exists from `B` to `A`. Because of these rules, when an array element of a *reference_type* is passed as an input, output, or reference parameter, a run-time check is required to ensure that the actual element type of the array is *identical* to that of the parameter.

Reviewer: same point: "passed by reference" might be simpler.

>
> *end example*

> When arguments are omitted from a function member with corresponding optional parameters, the default arguments of the function member declaration are implicitly passed. (This can involve the creation of an unnamed *variable_reference*, as described above.)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When arguments are omitted from a function member with corresponding optional parameters, the default arguments of the function member declaration are implicitly passed. (This can involve the creation of a storage location, as described above.)
```

Reviewer 3: Action from 2023-04-19: Accept this suggestion to be consistent with the previous one.

> When arguments are omitted from a function member with corresponding optional parameters, the default arguments of the function member declaration are implicitly passed.  (This can involve the creation of an unnamed *variable_reference*, as described above.)

Reviewer 3: Nit: single space after period.

For each of the method arguments `Eᵢ`:

- If `Eᵢ` is an anonymous function, an *explicit parameter type inference* ([§12.6.3.8](expressions.md#12638-explicit-parameter-type-inferences)) is made *from* `Eᵢ` *to* `Tᵢ`
- Otherwise, if `Eᵢ` has a type `U` and `xᵢ` is a value parameter ([§15.6.2.2](classes.md#15622-value-parameters)) then a *lower-bound inference* ([§12.6.3.10](expressions.md#126310-lower-bound-inferences)) is made *from* `U` *to* `Tᵢ`.
- Otherwise, if `Eᵢ` has a type `U` and `xᵢ` is an input parameter (§method-input-parameters-new-clause), reference parameter ([§15.6.2.3](classes.md#15623-reference-parameters)), or output parameter ([§15.6.2.4](classes.md#15624-output-parameters)) then an *exact inference* ([§12.6.3.9](expressions.md#12639-exact-inferences)) is made *from* `U` *to* `Tᵢ`.

> - Otherwise, if `Eᵢ` has a type `U` and `xᵢ` is an input parameter (§method-input-parameters-new-clause) then a *lower bound inference* ([§12.6.3.10](expressions.md#126310-lower-bound-inferences)) is made *from* `U` *to* `Tᵢ`. A new storage location is created following the rules of §12.6.2.2 on corresponding parameters.

Reviewer 3: Was the intention to remove "an input parameter" from the bullet above? Otherwise, I can't see how we end up in this "Otherwise" as it's covered by the preceding one.

Reviewer: Yes. Thanks. Great catch.

- If `Eᵢ` is an anonymous function, an *explicit parameter type inference* ([§12.6.3.8](expressions.md#12638-explicit-parameter-type-inferences)) is made *from* `Eᵢ` *to* `Tᵢ`
- Otherwise, if `Eᵢ` has a type `U` and `xᵢ` is a value parameter ([§15.6.2.2](classes.md#15622-value-parameters)) then a *lower-bound inference* ([§12.6.3.10](expressions.md#126310-lower-bound-inferences)) is made *from* `U` *to* `Tᵢ`.

> 

Reviewer 3: Action from 2023-04-19: delete this blank line and subsequent to lines, which are duplicates of the ones above.

- If `Eᵢ` is an anonymous function, an *explicit parameter type inference* ([§12.6.3.8](expressions.md#12638-explicit-parameter-type-inferences)) is made *from* `Eᵢ` *to* `Tᵢ`
- Otherwise, if `Eᵢ` has a type `U` and `xᵢ` is a value parameter ([§15.6.2.2](classes.md#15622-value-parameters)) then a *lower-bound inference* ([§12.6.3.10](expressions.md#126310-lower-bound-inferences)) is made *from* `U` *to* `Tᵢ`.

> - Otherwise, if `Eᵢ` has a type `U` and `xᵢ` is an input (§method-input-parameters-new-clause), reference ([§15.6.2.3](classes.md#15623-reference-parameters)), or output ([§15.6.2.4](classes.md#15624-output-parameters)) parameter then an *exact inference* ([§12.6.3.9](expressions.md#12639-exact-inferences)) is made *from* `U` *to* `Tᵢ`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Otherwise, if `Eᵢ` has a type `U` and `xᵢ` is an input parameter (§method-input-parameters-new-clause), reference parameter ([§15.6.2.3](classes.md#15623-reference-parameters)), or output parameter ([§15.6.2.4](classes.md#15624-output-parameters)) then an *exact inference* ([§12.6.3.9](expressions.md#12639-exact-inferences)) is made *from* `U` *to* `Tᵢ`.
```

(Feel free to reject - this just feels clearer to me.)

> - Otherwise, if `Eᵢ` has a type `U` and `xᵢ` is an input parameter (§method-input-parameters-new-clause), reference parameter ([§15.6.2.3](classes.md#15623-reference-parameters)), or output parameter ([§15.6.2.4](classes.md#15624-output-parameters)) then an *exact inference* ([§12.6.3.9](expressions.md#12639-exact-inferences)) is made *from* `U` *to* `Tᵢ`.

Reviewer 3: Action from 2023-04-19: This isn't right. If `Eᵢ` has the `in` modifier, and `xᵢ` is an input parameter then there's an exact inference. If `xᵢ` is an input parameter but `Eᵢ` does *not* have the `in` modifier, there's just a lower bound inference from `U` to `Tᵢ`. (This isn't in the form a suggestion yet, just trying to express what's wrong.)

Reviewer 3: @BillWagner to wordsmith; worth getting this one checked.

Reviewer: Wordsmithed into 2 bullets. Leaving resolved to review updates.

- The expanded form is constructed by replacing the parameter array in the function member declaration with zero or more value parameters of the element type of the parameter array such that the number of arguments in the argument list `A` matches the total number of parameters. If `A` has fewer arguments than the number of fixed parameters in the function member declaration, the expanded form of the function member cannot be constructed and is thus not applicable.
- Otherwise, the expanded form is applicable if for each argument in `A`, one of the following is true:
  - the parameter-passing mode of the argument is identical to the parameter-passing mode of the corresponding parameter, and
    - for a fixed value parameter or a value parameter created by the expansion, an implicit conversion ([§10.2](conversions.md#102-implicit-conversions)) exists from the argument expression to the type of the corresponding parameter, or

>     - for `in`, `out`, or `ref` parameter, the type of the argument expression is identical to the type of the corresponding parameter.

Reviewer: could be simpler to use pass by reference.

    - for `in`, `out`, or `ref` parameter, the type of the argument expression is identical to the type of the corresponding parameter.
  - the parameter-passing mode of the argument is value, and the parameter-passing mode of the corresponding parameter is input, and an implicit conversion ([§10.2](conversions.md#102-implicit-conversions)) exists from the argument expression to the type of the corresponding parameter
  
> *Example*: Given the following declarations and method calls:
>
> ```csharp
> public static void M1(int p1) { … }
> public static void M1(in int p1) { … }
> int i = 10; uint ui = 34U;
> 
> M1(in i);   // M1(in int) is applicable
> M1(in ui);  // no exact type match, so M1(in int) is not applicable
> M1(i);      // M1(int) and M1(in int) are applicable
> M1(i + 5);  // M1(int) and M1(in int) are applicable
> M1(100u);   // no implicit conversion exists, so M1(int) is not applicable
> 
> public static void M2(in int p1) { … }
> 
> M2(in i);   // M2(in int) is applicable
> M2(i);      // M2(in int) is applicable
> M2(i + 5);  // M2(in int) is applicable
> ```
>
> *end example*
  

> #### 11.6.4.3 Better function member

Reviewer: This got broken in the rebase:

```suggestion
#### 12.6.4.3 Better function member
```

>
> *end example*
  

> #### 12.6.4.3 Better function member

Reviewer 3: Gosh, do we never refer to "better function member" now?

Reviewer 3: Hmm - we do, on line 994. Do we really want to remove this subhead?

Reviewer: In a previous rebase this subhead moved below the following bullet list. The following bullets should be part of "The second phase", which starts on line 764.

- Otherwise if one member is a non-lifted operator and the other is a lifted operator, the non-lifted one is better.
- If neither function member was found to be better, and all parameters of `Mᵥ` have a corresponding argument whereas default arguments need to be substituted for at least one optional parameter in `Mₓ`, then `Mᵥ` is better than `Mₓ`. Otherwise, no function member is better.

#### §better-argument-passing-mode-new-clause Better argument-passing mode

> It is permitted to have corresponding parameters in two overloaded methods differ only by parameter-passing mode provided one and only one of the two parameters has value-passing mode, as follows:

Reviewer: See? You're already introducing the concept of pass by value here.

- Otherwise if one member is a non-lifted operator and the other is a lifted operator, the non-lifted one is better.
- If neither function member was found to be better, and all parameters of `Mᵥ` have a corresponding argument whereas default arguments need to be substituted for at least one optional parameter in `Mₓ`, then `Mᵥ` is better than `Mₓ`. Otherwise, no function member is better.

#### §better-argument-passing-mode-new-clause Better argument-passing mode

> It is permitted to have corresponding parameters in two overloaded methods differ only by parameter-passing mode provided one and only one of the two parameters has value-passing mode, as follows:

Reviewer 3: I don't think "only one" is required here, given that we're saying "they differ only in parameter-passing mode". They can't differ only in parameter passing mode and both have a value-passing mode :)

- When `this` is used in a *primary_expression* within an instance method or instance accessor of a class, it is classified as a value. The type of the value is the instance type ([§15.3.2](classes.md#1532-the-instance-type)) of the class within which the usage occurs, and the value is a reference to the object for which the method or accessor was invoked.
- When `this` is used in a *primary_expression* within an instance constructor of a struct, it is classified as a variable. The type of the variable is the instance type ([§15.3.2](classes.md#1532-the-instance-type)) of the struct within which the usage occurs, and the variable represents the struct being constructed.
  - If the constructor declaration has no constructor initializer, the `this` variable behaves exactly the same as an `out` parameter of the struct type. In particular, this means that the variable shall be definitely assigned in every execution path of the instance constructor.

>   - Otherwise, the `this` variable behaves exactly the same as a `in` parameter of the struct type. In particular, this means that the variable is considered initially assigned, and can't be reassigned.

Reviewer 3: Unless this changes in C# 8+, this doesn't appear to be the case:

```csharp
struct Test
{
    Test(int t) : this()
    {
        // Constructor with a constructor initializer, but still able to reassign this afterwards
        this = new Test("h");
    }

    Test(string x)
    {
    }
}
```

Reviewer: I think you're right. Let's discuss, but I think this change should be reverted.

Reviewer 3: Action 2023-04-19: this needs to be for members of readonly structs, other than the constructor.
@BillWagner to fix.

- When `this` is used in a *primary_expression* within an instance method or instance accessor of a struct, it is classified as a variable. The type of the variable is the instance type ([§15.3.2](classes.md#1532-the-instance-type)) of the struct within which the usage occurs.

>   - If the method or accessor is not an iterator ([§15.14](classes.md#1514-iterators)) or async function ([§15.15](classes.md#1515-async-functions)), the `this` variable represents the struct for which the method or accessor was invoked, and behaves exactly the same as a `in` parameter of the struct type.

Reviewer 3: Again, that doesn't appear to be the case.

```csharp
class Program
{
    static void Main()
    {
        Test t = new Test(5);
        t.ChangeMe(10);
        Console.WriteLine(t.value); // Prints 10
    }
}

struct Test
{
    public int value;

    public Test(int value)
    {
        this.value = value;
    }

    public void ChangeMe(int value)
    {
        this = new Test(value);
    }
}
```

Reviewer: Also agreed.

Reviewer 3: Action 2023-04-19: As above, this is a struct vs readonly struct difference.
